A QR code, short for quick-response code, is a type of two-dimensional matrix barcode invented in 1994 by Masahiro Hara of the Japanese company Denso Wave for labelling automobile parts. It features white and black squares within a square grid featuring fiducial markers on the corners, readable by imaging devices like cameras, and processed using Reed-Solomon error correction until the image can be appropriately interpreted. The required data is then extracted from patterns that are present in both the horizontal and the vertical components of the QR image.

Whereas a barcode is a machine-readable optical image that contains information specific to the labeled item, the QR code contains the data for a locator, an identifier, and web tracking. To store data efficiently, QR codes use four standardized modes of encoding: numeric, alphanumeric, byte or binary, and kanji. Compared to standard UPC barcodes, the QR labeling system was applied beyond the automobile industry because of faster reading of the optical image and greater data-storage capacity in applications such as product tracking, item identification, time tracking, document management, and general marketing.

The QR code system was invented in 1994, at the Denso Wave automotive products company in Japan. The initial alternating-square design presented by the team of researchers, headed by Masahiro Hara, was influenced by the black counters and the white counters played on a Go board; the pattern of the position detection markers was determined by finding the least-used sequence of alternating black-white areas on printed matter, which was found to be (1:1:3:1:1).

The functional purpose of the QR code system was to facilitate keeping track of the types and numbers of automobile parts, by replacing individually-scanned bar-code labels on each box of auto parts with a single label that contained the data of each label. The quadrangular configuration of the QR code system consolidated the data of the various bar-code labels with kanji, kana, and alphanumeric codes printed onto a single label.

During June 2011, 14 million American mobile users scanned a QR code or a barcode. Some 58 percent of those users scanned a QR or barcode from their homes, while 39 percent scanned from retail stores; 53 percent of the 14 million users were men between the ages of 18 and 34.

In 2022, 89 million people in the United States scanned a QR code using their mobile devices, up by 26 percent compared to 2020. The majority of QR code users used them to make payments or to access product and menu information.

As of 2024, QR codes are used in a much broader context, including both commercial tracking applications and convenience-oriented applications aimed at mobile phone users, termed mobile tagging. QR codes may be used to display text to the user, to open a webpage on the user's device, to add a vCard contact to the user's device, to open a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), to connect to a wireless network, or to compose an email or text message. There are many QR code generators available as software or as online tools that are either free or require a paid subscription. The QR code has become one of the most-used types of two-dimensional code.

Several standards cover the encoding of data as QR codes. In October 1997, the Association for Automatic Identification and Mobility International established standards. January 1999 saw the JIS X 0510 standard. June 2000 brought the ISO/IEC 18004:2000 Information technology standard for automatic identification and data capture techniques covering QR code symbology, which now defines QR code models 1 and 2 symbols but is now withdrawn. September 2006 established ISO/IEC 18004:2006 covering QR code 2005 symbols, an extension of QR code model 2, though it does not specify how to read QR code model 1 symbols, or require this for compliance, and is now withdrawn.

February 2015 brought ISO/IEC 18004:2015 renaming the QR Code 2005 symbol to QR Code and adding clarification to some procedures and minor corrections. This was withdrawn and updated to 18004:2024 in August 2024, which optimizes encoding efficiency, improves error correction, and refines structured append functionality. May 2022 established ISO/IEC 23941:2022 covering the requirements for Rectangular Micro QR Code.

At the application layer, there is some variation between most of the implementations. Japan's NTT DoCoMo has established de facto standards for the encoding of URLs, contact information, and several other data types. The open-source ZXing project maintains a list of QR code data types.

QR codes have become common in consumer advertising. Typically, a smartphone is used as a QR code scanner, displaying the code and converting it to some useful form, such as a standard URL for a website, thereby obviating the need for a user to type it into a web browser. QR codes have become a focus of advertising strategy to provide a way to access a brand's website more quickly than by manually entering a URL.

The amount of data that can be represented by a QR code symbol depends on the data type (mode, or input character set), version (1 through 40, indicating the overall dimensions of the symbol, with the formula 4 times version number plus 17 dots on each side), and error correction level. The maximum storage capacities occur for version 40 and error correction level L (low).

For numeric-only data, the maximum character storage capacity is 7,089 characters at 3 1/3 bits per character, representing the digits 0 through 9. Alphanumeric encoding allows for 4,296 characters at 5.5 bits per character, covering digits 0 through 9, uppercase A through Z, space, and a limited set of special characters including dollar sign, percent, asterisk, plus, hyphen, period, forward slash, and colon. Binary or byte encoding allows for 2,953 characters at 8 bits per character, using ISO/IEC 8859-1. Kanji and kana encoding supports 1,817 characters at 13 bits per character, using Shift JIS X 0208.

QR codes use Reed-Solomon error correction over the finite field F256 or GF(2^8), where elements are encoded as bytes of 8 bits. The Reed-Solomon code uses one of 37 different polynomials over F256, with degrees ranging from 7 to 68, depending on how many error correction bytes the code adds.

The four error correction levels provide different capabilities. Level L (Low) allows 7 percent of data bytes to be restored. Level M (Medium) allows 15 percent of data bytes to be restored. Level Q (Quartile) allows 25 percent of data bytes to be restored. Level H (High) allows 30 percent of data bytes to be restored. The higher the error correction level, the less the storage capacity.

In larger QR symbols, the message is broken up into several Reed-Solomon code blocks. The block size is chosen so that no attempt is made at correcting more than 15 errors per block; this limits the complexity of the decoding algorithm. The code blocks are then interleaved together, making it less likely that localized damage to a QR symbol will overwhelm the capacity of any single block.

Due to error correction, it is possible to create artistic QR codes with embellishments to make them more readable or attractive to the human eye, and to incorporate colors, logos, and other features into the QR code block; the embellishments are treated as errors, but the codes still scan correctly. It is also possible to design artistic QR codes without reducing the error correction capacity by manipulating the underlying mathematical constructs. Image processing algorithms are also used to reduce errors in QR codes.
